Enhancement for opm content management features (#26)
operator-framework/enhancements: enhancements/opm-content-management.md

---
title: opm-content-management 
authors:
  - "@anik120"
reviewers:
  - TBD
approvers:
  - TBD
creation-date: yyyy-mm-dd
last-updated: yyyy-mm-dd
status: implementable
---

# OPM Content Management

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA

## Summary

This enhancement is a proposal for extending the existing capabilites of the `opm` command line utility, to provide more fine grained control over the management of catalog indexes.   

> `opm` will have significant improvement to UX for editing an index (removing individual bundles from a package, removing channels from a package). Indexes can also be queried directly for inspection, and update graph visualization for individual packages will be added. Bundle validation without a deamon will is also proposed in this enhancement. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`opm` will significantly improve the UX around working with indexes by enabling removing individual bundles from a package and removing channels from a package. Indexes will now also be able to be queried directly for inspection, and update graph visualization for individual packages will be added. Bundle validation without a deamon is also proposed in this enhancement. 
```

> `opm` will have significant improvement to UX for editing an index (removing individual bundles from a package, removing channels from a package). Indexes can also be queried directly for inspection, and update graph visualization for individual packages will be added. Bundle validation without a deamon will is also proposed in this enhancement. 

Reviewer: Is the daemon-less validation for docker users only? would it be worth mentioning that explicitly?

## Motivation

As more and more operators are migrated to the new bundle format, and more index images are created for Operator Catalogs, creators of catalogs of operators, such as the Red Hat pipeline responsible for maintaining the `redhat-operators` catalog, should have more fine grained control over the management of the catalogs using the `opm` tooling.  

### Goals

- Allow `opm` users to perform bundle validations in environments without a Docker daemon. Bundle validation also includes validation of bundle image labels against `metadata/annotations.yaml`

> - Allow `opm` users to safely edit indexes, which includes removing bundle version from a package in an index, and removing a channel from a bundle. 

Reviewer 2: IIRC we also want to edit the channels

Reviewer 2: example: promotion from techpreview to stable

Author: @gallettilance do you mean change the default channel of a package?

Reviewer 2: any channel

Reviewer 2: this needs to handle deprecation (say the 4.1 channel should be removed) and promotion  (say the techpreview becomes stable)

Author: @gallettilance this section tackles the deprecation of a channel: https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/26/files#diff-e5605260b53989d798d8558d3bf4c1f0R93

However, promotion of techpreview to stable seems like creating a discrepancy between what the operator author had communicated (via CSVs) and what the index author is attempting to do.

Reviewer 3: > promotion of techpreview to stable seems like creating a discrepancy between what the operator author had communicated (via CSVs) and what the index author is attempting to do.

I think we need to treat what the CSV says as the initial state, not the final state. The workflow for channel promotion becomes hairy (and you lose provenance - the bundle digest will change after promotion) if we don't allow the index to be authoritative on this

- Allow `opm` users to inspect catalog content and return the update graph of Operators in machine-readable format.

> 

Reviewer 2: IIRC we also want to define the source of truth for an index so that it can be rebuilt. IMO the transactions that are applied to the DB that don't come from bundle labels / annotations should be logged or output somewhere.

Reviewer 4: +1 understanding provenance and reproducibility of distributed artifacts is key.

Author: @gallettilance @mhrivnak the state of the index is already recorded in a database, which is also edited when content in the index is edited. The information on the database is sufficient to rebuild the index with, unless there's other reasoning/s to support logging of the transactions.

Reviewer 5: @anik120 I suggest to plug here your parallel work on declarative index configs, to form the base of reproducible catalog/index creation. The goal being:

- Allow `opm` users to create a catalog / index reproducible from scratch using an on-disk index representation in human-friendly and machine-readable text format

### Non-Goals

> 

Reviewer: Maybe a non-goal could be providing the update graphs back to `opm` to then generate on the fly - like the reverse of the proposed goal

Author: @exdx isn't the update graph implicitly generated by operator-registry? Do you envision an user to expect `opm` to generate the update graph?

## Proposal
 
### Implementation Details

### Validate the bundle image labels against bundle annotations

Currently, `opm alpha bundle validate` validates only the content of `metadata/annotations.yaml` file, but not the image labels of the DockerFile. The image labels are used when the bundle is added to an index image. As a result, if there are mismatches between the content of the bundle image (i.e `metadata/annotations.yaml`) and the bundle image labels, the bundle image is invalid and could potentially cause issues when it is added to an index image.

> The `opm alpha bundle validate` command will be enhanced with an extra step that'll check to see if the contents of `metadata/annotations.yaml` matches with the labels of the bundle image. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `opm alpha bundle validate` command will be enhanced with an extra step that will check to see if the contents of `metadata/annotations.yaml` matches with the labels of the bundle image. 
```

Reviewer 2: what does it mean to match? Is it ok to have labels that are not in the annotations? annotations that are not in the labels?

Author: @gallettilance the idea is to have the exact number of annotations as the number of labels. I'll be more specific about this in this para.

### Explain and visualize the update graph of an operator in an index

> A new sub-command `graph` will be added under `opm alpha bundle` to allow operator authors or cluster admins to understand the update graph for a given Operator in a catalog, so that the update graph can be reasoned about for correctness and available versions.

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't this be a command on the index subcommand since it has to do with an index?

Author: @gallettilance that is a good point. Editing this section to have the `graph` sub-command under the `index` command.

> The `graph` sub-command will have a `type` flag, to denote the type of graph visualization, one of `ascii` (for ASCII representation of the graph), `graphical` (for a graphical visualization of the graph, possibly using (go-graphviz)[https://github.com/goccy/go-graphviz]), or `json` (for a human readable data format of the graph). The default option will be `ascii`. 

Reviewer: This part is really interesting. Maybe we could also have a `png` flag to simply export the graph to a file?

Author: @exdx that's a great idea! I like the idea of exporting the graphical visualization to a file.

For example, `opm alpha bundle graph --type=graphical --package=example-operator quay.io/example-namespace/example-index:v0.0.1`

### Support for deamonless bundle validation

> Currently, `opm` requires either the docker or the podman deamon for bundle validation (mostly for unpacking container image). This dependency on a deamon will be removed by using the imported (api library)[https://github.com/operator-framework/api] which now  

Reviewer: I don't believe `podman` requires a daemon IIRC

As an operator author, I want to be able to validate bundle image without a daemon or source out to a binary/CLI tool in local host. Ideally, bundle validation tool is a self-container tool without requiring any external tool being installed.

### Support for removing an individual Operator bundle from an index

Currently, `opm` has an `index rm` option that allows for the deletion of a package entirely from an index. 

`opm` will be enhanced to provide an option to delete an operator from a package:
a) From the leaf end of the update graph for a package 
b) From the beginning of the update graph for a package 
c) From the middle of an update graph for a package

> 

Reviewer: A simple example here of the 3 scenarios would be helpful

To achieve this, two flags will be introduced under the `index rm` sub-command, `package` and `bundle`.

`opm index rm --package=example-operator quay.io/example-namespace/example-index:v0.0.1` will remove a package from an index 

> `opm index rm --bundle=example-operatorv1.0.0 quay.io/example-namespace/example-index:v0.0.1` will remove the bundle from a package in an index. 

Reviewer 2: can we have it be the bundlepath instead of the csv name?

Author: Sure that works too.

Reviewer 6: Some cleanup based on changes since this PR was created:

`opm <index | registry> rm --packages <packagenames>` was added in PR https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-registry/pull/243

Being able to deprecate bundles was added in PR https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-registry/pull/397

### Support for removing a channel from a package in a bundle 

`opm index rm` will also have a `channel` flag, that will be paired with the `package` flag to remove a channel from a package, and all the bundles that belong to that channel. 

```
$ opm index rm --channel=beta --package=example-operator quay.io/example-namespace/example-indexv-0.0.1

Removed bundles example-operatorv0.0.1, example-operatorv0.0.2 from package example-operator. 
Deleted channel beta from example-operator.

``` 

#### Open question

> Once a bundle is removed from a pacakge in an index, is the onus on `opm` to handle the upgrade of bundles that have already been installed in a cluster, but have been removed from the index?  

Reviewer 2: IMO this is up to the product team or operator owner to decide / be aware of

### Package inspection using opm 

Currently, the procedure of inspecting an index requires several manual steps: 

1) Pull the latest index image 
2) Build and serve the registry database to expose the grpc api 
3) Query the database 

> The `inspect` sub-command will be introduced under the `opm index` command to facilitate single step inspection of an index. 

Reviewer: Is this command going to use `grpcurl` under the hood?

### Goals

- Allow `opm` users to perform bundle validations in environments without a Docker daemon. Bundle validation also includes validation of bundle image labels against `metadata/annotations.yaml`
- Allow `opm` users to safely edit indexes, which includes removing bundle version from a package in an index, and removing a channel from a bundle. 
- Allow `opm` users to inspect catalog content and return the update graph of Operators in machine-readable format.

### Non-Goals

## Proposal
 
### Implementation Details

### Validate the bundle image labels against bundle annotations

Currently, `opm alpha bundle validate` validates only the content of `metadata/annotations.yaml` file, but not the image labels of the DockerFile. The image labels are used when the bundle is added to an index image. As a result, if there are mismatches between the content of the bundle image (i.e `metadata/annotations.yaml`) and the bundle image labels, the bundle image is invalid and could potentially cause issues when it is added to an index image.

> The `opm alpha bundle validate` command will be enhanced with an extra step that will check to see if the contents of `metadata/annotations.yaml` matches with the labels of the bundle image. If the `metadata/annotations.yaml` contain fields that are not there in the labels of the image or vice versa, the validation will fail.  

Reviewer: Are we saying we want to fail if the set of labels in the `annotations.yaml` don't exactly match the labels on the generated image? I believe what we want is the image labels to be a superset of the the `annotation.yaml` labels, so they can be customized and used in an ad-hoc way (they are just images). 

I think this is what you're saying here, but maybe just clarify a bit because it is a bit confusing

Author: @exdx aren't the labels in the images supposed to be exactly the annotations in `annotations.yaml`?

Reviewer 5: I think we want to fail if there are labels in `annotations.yaml` that are not on the image. I think other tooling/registries should remain able to apply additional labels on the image without `opm bundle validate` complaining.

### Explain and visualize the update graph of an operator in an index

A new sub-command `graph` will be added under `opm index` to allow operator authors or cluster admins to understand the update graph for a given Operator in a catalog, so that the update graph can be reasoned about for correctness and available versions.

> The `graph` sub-command will have a `type` flag, to denote the type of graph visualization, one of `ascii` (for ASCII representation of the graph), `graphical` (for a graphical visualization of the graph, possibly using (go-graphviz)[https://github.com/goccy/go-graphviz] that will ultimately be exported to a png file in the working directory), or `json` (for a human readable data format of the graph). The default option will be `ascii`. 

Reviewer 3: nit: `text` is more common for other ecosystem tools

Reviewer 3: `graphical` -> `png`

we might also want `type=dot`

`--out` is more common than `--type`

For example, `opm index graph --type=graphical --package=example-operator quay.io/example-namespace/example-index:v0.0.1`

### Support for deamonless bundle validation

Currently, `opm` requires the docker deamon for bundle validation (mostly for unpacking container image) by default. This dependency on a deamon will be removed by using containerd or podman as default container tools to pull and unpack container images for validating the bundle.    

> As an operator author, I want to be able to validate bundle image without a daemon or source out to a binary/CLI tool in local host. Ideally, bundle validation tool is a self-container tool without requiring any external tool being installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an operator author, I want to be able to validate a bundle image without requiring a daemon or shelling out to a local binary. Ideally, bundle validation is self-contained without requiring any external tool being installed.
```

### Support for removing an individual Operator bundle from an index

Currently, `opm` has an `index rm` option that allows for the deletion of a package entirely from an index. 

`opm` will be enhanced to provide an option to delete an operator from a package:
a) From the leaf end of the update graph for a package 
b) From the beginning of the update graph for a package 
c) From the middle of an update graph for a package

To achieve this, two flags will be introduced under the `index rm` sub-command, `package` and `bundle`.

`opm index rm --package=<package-name> quay.io/example-namespace/example-index:v0.0.1` will remove a package from an index 

> `opm index rm --bundle=<bundle-path> quay.io/example-namespace/example-index:v0.0.1` will remove the bundle from a package in an index. 

Reviewer 3: this section could use a little bit more detail.

one of the things we want `rm` to do is to "skip" the removed operator, so an outline of what changes will happen to the graph would be good.

Reviewer 3: since this is an enhancement, we should write out why we want to skip instead of delete (so that existing clusters that have installed the "bad" release can get updated the newer version).

### Support for removing a channel from a package in a bundle 

`opm index rm` will also have a `channel` flag, that will be paired with the `package` flag to remove a channel from a package, and all the bundles that belong to that channel. 

```
$ opm index rm --channel=beta --package=example-operator quay.io/example-namespace/example-indexv-0.0.1

Removed bundles example-operatorv0.0.1, example-operatorv0.0.2 from package example-operator. 
Deleted channel beta from example-operator.

``` 

#### Open question

> Once a bundle is removed from a pacakge in an index, is the onus on `opm` to handle the upgrade of bundles that have already been installed in a cluster, but have been removed from the index?  

Reviewer 3: I think we do want OLM to manage the `skip` list for surrounding operator updates, so that clusters that have seen the "bad" operator can update properly. See: https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-lifecycle-manager/blob/master/doc/design/how-to-update-operators.md#skipping-updates

> ### Package inspection using opm 

Reviewer 3: How will this differ from the graph json output? Can we just rely on the graph json, or additional "types" of graph output?

Author: @ecordell if you're referring to the `json` output (as one of `json`, `text` etc) then that was for visualizing the update graph of a particular bundle. 
This section talks about a machine-readable representation of all the packages present inside an index.

Reviewer 5: I agree. Understanding the update graph of a particular package or bundle version is a different use case to understanding the content of the catalog as whole.
